---
title: "Cultivating Musical Excellence in the Driftless Region"
subtitle:
date: 
draft: false
author: "Emma Schaeffer"
articletype: "Essay"
headerimage_dg: "grinnell:28755"
headshot_dg: "grinnell:28544"
authorbio: "
Wyatt  and  Monika  Sutherland  founded  Pierce Hill Performing Arts  in 2018 out of  a  desire  to  provide  opportunities  for  young  musicians  and  to  expose  people  in  south-western  Wisconsin  to  artistic  excellence.  They  met  at  Indiana  University’s  School  of  Music  in  Bloomington,  Indiana,  while  studying with the renowned cellist and pedagogue, Janos  Starker,  and  went  on  to  become  professional  cellists.  Knowing  that  a  chamber music ensemble can be rich in life lessons,  in  2007  they  founded  YellowCello Young  Artists,  a  conductor-less  chamber  orchestra  program  for  young  string  players  centered  around  leadership,  team  dynamics,  and  communication.  Wyatt  uses  many  of  the  same  transformational  leadership  techniques with his Fortune 100 clients that he taught to middle/high-school students in YellowCello

Emma Schaefer, from Niwot, Colorado, is a student at Grinnell College (class of 2022) where she is studying Multimedia Storytell-ing. She is on the Cross Country and Track teams, works in Admissions as a tour guide, co-hosts open mic nights, and regularly per-forms as a singer-songwriter."
---

Pierce  Hill  Performing  Arts  cultivates  artistic  excellence  of  music  in  the  Driftless  Region  of  southwestern  Wisconsin.  A  coalescence  of  music  and  community, the non-profit has two main focuses: bringing renowned musicians to perform in rural Wisconsin and  providing  music  scholarships  for  young  people  to  attend  music  camps.  I  interviewed  the  founder,  Wyatt  Sutherland, to learn the story behind Pierce Hill.
Pierce Hill’s existence is a testament to many people’s generosity and commitment to music. When Wyatt’s mother moved to the U.S. from Japan before he was born, her father told her to make sure that her children studied  music.  He  insisted  that  music  opens  doors  to  opportunities  in  a  way  that  nothing  else  can.  Heeding  this advice, she saw to it that Wyatt and his sister studied music growing up. Though the family lived in poverty, she made sure that this did not prevent her children from pursuing music. Wyatt’s mother worked three jobs and was committed to having her children receive quality music instruction. Wyatt took lessons, attended music camps, and developed talent on the cello.
As time went on, friends and strangers stepped in to financially support Wyatt’s cello endeavors. One person  paid  for  his  cello  lessons,  another  for  instrument  maintenance,  and  still  others  paid  for  his  taxi  rides  to  cities  to  attend  different  music-related  events.  At  one  point,  Wyatt  had  the  opportunity  to  attend  a  summer  camp, but couldn’t afford it. An anonymous donor came forward and paid for the camp tuition. After graduating high  school,  Wyatt  found  himself  playing  a  recital  in  Oklahoma City. A family asked him what type of cello he played, and, realizing that it was of low quality, asked him  why  he  didn’t  have  a  better  instrument.  When  he  told them that his mother already worked three jobs so he couldn’t afford to get a new one, the family flew him to  Chicago  and  paid  for  a  new  cello.  Wyatt  reflects  on  how,  throughout  his  life,  people  have  financially  supported his pursuit of music.  
Inspired  by  the  generosity  shown  to  him,  Wyatt  dreamed  of  creating  an  organization  that  would  support young musicians in developing their musical abilities.  Established  in  2018,  Pierce  Hill  Performing  Arts  made Wyatt’s dream a reality. Drawing inspiration from barns converted into performance halls such as [Tanglewood](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tanglewood) in the Berkshire Mountains and [The Barns at Wolf Trap](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wolf_Trap_National_Park_for_the_Performing_Arts) in Washington DC, he and his family built a wooden barn on their property outside of [Viroqua, Wisconsin](https://viroqua-wisconsin.com/). During the winter, Wyatt keeps farm equipment in the barn, and in the summer, transforms the barn into a beautiful  performance  space.  Throughout  the  summer  months, world-renowned musicians perform there as a part of Pierce Hill’s summer concert series, and people come from near and far to attend. Before each concert, people  enjoy  a  candlelit  picnic  on  the  property,  and  often  food  vendors  come  to  sell  locally-sourced  food.  Performers such as [The Accidentals](https://www.theaccidentalsmusic.com/), [Ickes and Hensley](), Leyla  McCalla  of  the  [Carolina  Chocolate  Drops](http://www.carolinachocolatedrops.com/),  and  countless     professional   chamber   musicians   have  performed  in  the  barn.

Wyatt’s       answer       in  response  to  why  he  wanted  to  bring  these  concerts  to  rural  Wisconsin   illuminates   an   interesting    aspect    of    small        communities.        He   noted   how   much   he  respects  the  people  of  his  community  and  everything they do, but he has learned over the years  that  people  who  live  in  small  towns  often   don’t   know   what   the wider world is like. Specifically, the live music  they  are  exposed  to  rarely matches the caliber of music in big cities. Because of this, he wanted to bring renowned musicians to the community to give people exposure to an excellence of music  that  they  had  never  heard  before.  In  May  2018,  after  the  first  concert  at  Pierce  Hill,  Wyatt  remembers  how people left stunned, having never before witnessed such musical talent. 
Not  only  is  Pierce  Hill  exposing  people  to  excellent music, it’s giving young people the opportunity to become  excellent  musicians.  Wyatt  notes  the  difficulty  of  finding  quality  music  teachers  in  smaller  towns,  as  cities present many more teaching opportunities. When his four children were growing up, his wife drove them to Chicago, Madison, and the Twin Cities every weekend for fifteen years for their music lessons. By providing  the  scholarships  for  young  musicians,  Pierce  Hill  is helping students to enhance their music abilities beyond their local communities.  
These scholarships come from proceeds from the concert ticket sales. The scholarships are merit-based, and  young  Wisconsin  musicians  can  apply  by  submitting a live performance video, along with an essay about how  the  camp  will  help  them.  Pierce  Hill  Performing Arts funded a scholarship for high school violinist Tiffanie White to attend Indiana University Summer String Academy in 2019, contributing to her continued development in music. She was honored to have been taught by  Mimi  Zweig,  professor  of  music  at  [Indiana  University  Jacobs  School](https://jacobsacademy.indiana.edu/index.html)  of  Music  and  director  of  the  Summer String Academy, who helped Tiffanie focus on how she was artistically crafting every piece that she played. She says, “I was inspired to come out of myself and become an artist by ‘painting a picture’ as I perform.” The program also taught her how to practice efficiently and gave her more experience in collaborating with pianists and  chamber  groups.  A  teacher  herself,  Tiffanie  notes,  “I want to help others to be successful on their instrument  and  learn  to  love  violin  like  I  do.”  By  attending  the  program  last  summer,  she  has  more  of  a  vision  of  the  potential  each  student  has  to  become  an  excellent  musician.  
What  stands  out  to  me  about  Pierce  Hill  is  the  exposure  it  provides  to  what  is  possible,  not  just  in  music  but  in  all  aspects  of  life.  When  people  first  hear  outstanding music, they may begin to realize that other things in their life also have the potential to become higher caliber. This recognition of excellence keeps people motivated, invigorated, and enables them to accomplish things they never thought they could. Pierce Hill serves as a reminder that with time, dedication, and the support of community, we can all achieve excellence in whatever we do.{{% leaf-bug %}}