---
title: "Sacrifice State"
subtitle: "An Interview with Bill Stowe"
date: 2020-08-07T02:18:51-07:00
draft: false
author: "Maya Dru"
articletype: "Interview"
headerimage: "bill-stowe-interview.jpg"
headshot: 'bill-stowe.jpg'
description:
authorbio: "Bill Stowe, the CEO and General Manager of the Des Moines Water Works (DMWW), recently passed away after a brief struggle with pancreatic cancer. In the weeks before his death, he spoke with Rootstalk Associate Editor Maya Dru concerning his long battle on behalf of the water-consuming public he served at the head of his agency.

Under Stowe’s leadership, DMWW worked closely with business, environmental, consumer and agricultural leaders to advocate for better stewardship of water resources and clean water initiatives throughout Central Iowa.

Stowe was a Phi Beta Kappa graduate of Grinnell College with a Bachelor of Arts, and he also held a Master of Science in Engineering (University of Wisconsin), a Master of Science in Industrial Relations (University of Illinois), and a Juris Doctorate Degree (Loyola University Law School). Stowe sat on the Board of the Association of Metropolitan Water Agencies, representing the largest drinking water utilities in North America. He was a member of the American Society of Civil Engineers, a member of the Iowa Bar, and he frequently acted through the American Arbitration Association as an impartial arbitrator in resolving complex construction and commercial disputes involving public and private construction projects."
---

***Rootstalk:*** I read the court ruling on Des Moines Water Works
versus the counties \[DWWW brought suit against three agricultural
counties upstream from Des Moines, in which the agency held that the
counties should be considered to be point-source polluters, and should
pay damages for the negative effects their practices had on Iowans
living downstream\]. I was wondering what you thought of the ruling, and
if you were to respond to it, what you would say.

**Stowe:** You know, there are actually two rulings. I assume you read
the Iowa State Supreme Court decision and then there was also a decision
from a U.S. District Court here in Iowa. In both cases, we were
certainly disappointed. In the Iowa case, the Iowa Supreme Court by a 3
to 2 majority, basically said that we did not have standing to...sue
\[the\] drainage districts in Iowa. \[These are the\] public utilities
that drain farmland. \[They are\] supervised by a county board of
supervisors \[and are held to be\] immune from suits, particularly
\[those brought by\] other public entities \[such as\] the Des Moines
Water Works. So, \[we were\] certainly disappointed by that
\[decision\]. But I understand and respect the rule of law and the
court’s ultimate jurisdiction.

The other ruling was from a Federal Court, and we had serious
disagreement with \[the ruling because it\] essentially just sidestepped
the whole idea about whether agriculture is immune from suit for
violations of environmental laws. And that is a far more serious issue
for us than this kind of nuanced issue about whether a local government
can sue another local government within the Iowa Constitution. So, we
accepted the Iowa Supreme Court decision, we were disappointed by it,
certainly, but the federal decision that essentially said it wasn’t even
going to rule on the basic issue of whether agriculture should be
regulated under the Clean Water Act was a huge disappointment for us.

***Rootstalk:*** Why do you think they ruled that way?

**Stowe:** Well, I mean, clearly the judge thought he was following
federal law. We think it’s an error of law and certainly regret that.
But you know the motives of judges and the motives of all of us are
always arguable, and \[it’s\] pretty speculative for us to put ourselves
in their position and guess why it is they did it. I have every reason
to believe that the federal judge believed he was following federal law,
but it just reinforces the myth that agriculture is unregulated under
the Clean Water Act. And that’s a huge concern for us and should be for
all Americans. Yeah, I mean what kind of precedent-keeping is that law?
I think it’s pretty narrow, because this is out of the Federal District
Court for the Northern District of Iowa. So relatively narrow.

District court rulings generally aren’t authoritative in driving
decisions of other district courts, but it certainly makes an argument
that our enemies will carry forward into other venues even though I
don’t think it decides the case. It certainly gives them a bit of an
upper hand that we would certainly not intend to give them.

***Rootstalk:*** So, given the results of a case, where does Des Moines
Water Works go from there?

**Stowe:** The decisions are about two years old now and we’re in the
process of spending millions more dollars on water cleaning processes
because we just don’t see anything other than a downward trend in
surface water quality in Iowa. Now that agriculture has seemingly been
given a free license in the wild, wild West to do whatever they want in
terms of environmental damage to our surface waters, we’re compensating
for that by spending a significant amount of money—tens of millions of
dollars over the next five to 10 years—to deal with the fact that
polluters don’t have accountability here, and \[will\] continue—in their
narrow self-interest—to push pollutants to us downstream. We’ll we have
to make that water safe and affordable for our consumers.

***Rootstalk:*** How are you making it affordable?

**Stowe:** Well, by using technologies that we believe are most
effective both in terms of an end result but also most efficient in
terms of cost. But at the end of the day, there’s no question that our
ratepayers are subsidizing upstream producers who are polluters that are
polluting our surface waters. And that’s a real problem. There is an
extra analogy there. The industrial agricultural model of row crops
(corn and soybeans) and livestock (particularly hogs) in Iowa and their
current method of farming particularly in our waterways is exporting all
kinds of pollutants into the Raccoon and Des Moines Rivers. And our
rate-payers are paying to clean it up just to make it safe for them to
drink.

***Rootstalk:*** How do the upstream producers pollute it?

**Stowe:** By the very act of adding anhydrous ammonia, by adding manure
to crop land and then draining it in a way that exports it to the river.
So, it’s endemic in the agricultural model that unfortunately we’re
stuck in right now, where greater production is the watchword as opposed
to greater sustainability and greater attention to regenerative
agriculture.

***Rootstalk:*** Do you think that’s going to shift at all?

**Stowe:** I’m certainly not a prophet. Or if I am, I’ve done a pretty
poor job so far in my life. at prophesizing what’s going to happen. I
think there will be a shift over time because ultimately this model of
industrial agriculture actually lessens and exhausts the resource of the
land that the farmers themselves own.

***Rootstalk:*** That’s very scary. But it also seems like, at least in
name, the state is trying to address it with the Nutrient Reduction
Srategy?

**Stowe:** I’m a native Iowan. I’m 60 years old. I’ve been around the
state for most of those 60 years. And the idea of conservation practices
adopted by some farmers and not by others has been really the only
\[established environmental protection policy concerning\] the surface
waters of the state. So, the Nutrient Reduction Strategy essentially
codified what’s the status quo in a very ineffective process with
stakeholders who have every interest in maintaining the status quo and
maintaining a voluntary strategy which really does nothing, other than
continue to encourage producers to produce more and pollute more.

***Rootstalk:*** How does it encourage producers?

**Stowe:** It encourages producers by saying what you’re doing now,
\[you can\] do more of it because we need to feed the world, when in
fact, we’re poisoning those downstream who use the water. As an example,
in pesticide drift there are other aspects of the industrial
agricultural model that go beyond drinking water. But I think you get
the point that a model of tilling more land, adding more chemicals,
producing higher yields in the short-term, continues to lead towards
long-term consequences. The short-term effects \[include\] things like
the hypoxic zone in the Gulf of Mexico and the type of water quality
that we’re experiencing here in Iowa. Who wants to go swimming or
boating in our rivers? We would far prefer, as Iowans, to go to
Minnesota, Wisconsin, where we know the waters are better protected and
in better shape than we would here. The Nutrient Reduction Strategy
plays into that do-nothing, whistle-in-the-dark kind of mentality.

***Rootstalk:*** So, what’s next?

**Stowe:** Well ultimately, we hope cooler regulatory heads will
prevail. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency right now is a
complete debacle \[in the way it’s\] rolling back environmental
protections. But the timeframe for that obviously is a concern for us
because many of the issues that we face are short-term public health
consequences. Seventy-five percent or so of Des Moines Public School
students receive subsidized school lunches. They and their parents,
their families, are paying higher water rates because polluters upstream
who affect the drinking water downstream are unaccountable.

***Rootstalk:*** I think a lot of people might say, “It’s very difficult
to farm, and if you’re trying to feed as many people as possible and
keep the farm afloat...you need to use chemicals.” How do you respond to
that?

**Stowe:** Well, there are a couple of things going on in the question.
One of them is that “farming is difficult.” That may well be, but it’s a
business, and you know we’re not talking about some kind of Norman
Rockwell picture here or American Gothic. Farming in this state is a
multimillion-dollar business. This is industrial agriculture, with
industrial chemicals, and industrial hybrid seeds, and industrial
machinery, \[all used on a\] large scale. So, \[let’s\] break that myth
a little bit. More production of hogs and field corn and soybeans isn’t
necessarily feeding the world. If you go to a local market, 90 percent
or so of the food that you’re buying is not from Iowa. We have just
become the sacrifice state—the pollutants sinkhole, if you will—in which
these industrial models that generate lots of waste and lots of agro
toxins are allowed to continue unfettered.

***Rootstalk:*** Wow, that’s tough language to use, calling Iowa \[an
environmental\] sinkhole. Can you can go into that more?

**Stowe:** Sure, happy to. If you were to look longitudinally at the
water quality in this state, you’re going to see alarming trends of more
and more pollutants coming into our waters. There are many people within
the public health community that see manifestations of that which are
very disconcerting. In Iowa, private wells aren’t tested, but
\[there’s\] a lot of concern that there are consequences \[affecting
our\] drinking water. \[This is\] an essential part of our day-to-day
living \[which has significant\] social and economic implications,
particularly for those with lesser incomes. And, again, to \[call the\]
current farming model at work on Iowa’s family farms “subsistence
farming” is really \[to perpetuate\] a myth.

We need to think as a community and think of the implications of the
continued emphasis on higher yields and short-term profits in industrial
agriculture. \[We need to turn\] away from that, and start thinking more
about the community aspects for our neighbors, for our communities, for
downstream water users, and—ultimately—for the soil that we all depend
on in this state for our economic prosperity.

The bottom line is this: drinking water is going to become unaffordable
or else available but dangerous for people to drink. And that is a
significant concern for those of us who are in this business. We’re not
selling a typical commodity, we’re in the public health business. I’m
not selling Grinnell Pioneer sweatshirts or beer. I’m in the process of
working, with many others, to sell drinking water, which you can’t live
without.

*This interview was edited for clarity and length. To hear our complete
conversation, visit our website: rootstalk.grinnell.edu.*
